## Forward/Preface/Intro ##

We set out to develop an interactive book on modeling and simulation using Insight Maker. As it turned out, after a few months we had developed an interactive book on modeling and simulation using Insight Maker. What we realized, upon arriving at the goal, was that the world didn't need another book on modeling and simulation and it surely didn't need an Insight Maker users guide. And glitzy technology couldn't turn what we had developed into what it needed to be. Though a glitzy technology oriented book on modeling and simulation that read like an Insight Maker users guide was just what we had created.

Fortunately for us a couple of our insightful and courageous sponsors were willing to tell us in no uncertain terms that the emperor had no clothes, and they were willing to repeat it until we got the message. So the reconstruction, along with a couple of intense positioning discussions ensued. During that exchange our thoughts migrated from thinking of the creation as a book, to thinking of it as an app, and finally as an Interactive Learning Environment (ILE), though not an ILE about modeling and simulation or about Insight Maker. The realization that emerged was that the ILE needed to present an approach for the user to better understand and deal with the world around them in a manner significantly better than they would have been able too before interacting with this ILE.

With all this awakening the label for this creation is beginning to look something like "Systems Insights for Y/Our Future: An Interactive Learning Environment" with a strong emphasis on "interactive." The August 30, 2013 beta release of Chapter 1 and Chapter 2 served as a good model for the direction of the first five chapters. And with this emphasis on interactive there was a question as to the sensibility of trying to create a physical copy of the ILE. There are aspects of the interactive interaction that would be completely lost in a physical copy of the ILE. You can let us know your whether our thoughts were appropriate after you experience this interactive learning environment.

An additional realization is that the ILE is just that, an interactive learning environment. It is not a development environment. While one can construct models and simulations in the environment any serious development should be done at InsightMaker.com because of the difference in the interfaces. We've also learned that there are critical functions that can be performed on a workstation for which there is no equivalent on a tablet or cell phone, e.g., mouseover, shift+click, ctrl+click, which are critical operations for doing some things. As you experience the restructured first two chapters you'll get a sense of this if you're on a tablet or cell phone.

People tend to read books in different ways. With that in mind we've designed this Interactive Learning Environment in a manner such that the first section is the only one you need to experience sequentially. It presents foundation concepts necessary to make sense out of rest of the ILE. Once you finish the first section you should be able to skip around as your interest directs.
~~~
August 30, 2013
Gene & Scott
~~~